FontGDOS Release - May 28, 1992

Legal Statement:
FONTGDOS.PRG and its associated Drivers, Control Panel Extensions, Desk
Accessories, and Installation Program ("FontGDOS") are Copyright
1989-1992 Atari Corporation. FontGDOS may not be uploaded to any
bulletin board systems, included in any PD or user group libraries,
sold, or distributed in any way without the express written approval
of Atari Corp.

In no event will Atari Corp. be liable to you for any incidental
damages of any kind, including loss of profits or data, even if Atari
Corp. is aware of the possibility of such damages arising from the
use of this software.

Atari is pleased to release FontGDOS, the latest version of the
Graphic Device Operating System for Atari TOS-based computers.
FontGDOS is a direct replacement for all existing versions of
GDOS.PRG. It provides many benefits over the existing version of
GDOS, as well as the "GDOS-clones" that are on the market:

1) Bitmap Caching for more efficient use of RAM; fonts are loaded
   into RAM on an as-needed basis instead of being resident constantly.
2) GEM/3 Bezier Curve VDI routines become instantly available to
   correctly written GEM applications.
3) More printer drivers are available than ever before, including
   Deskjet, Paintjet, Okidata Color, Epson Compatible 24-pin BW and
   Color.
4) Desk Accessories or Control Panel Extensions now allow you to
   easily change printer drivers on-the-fly. (Results will vary
   depending on how well-behaved the application is. Some
   applications will require that you select the driver before
   running it; well-behaved applications will allow you to select the
   driver anytime before actually printing.)
5) Desk Accessories or Control Panel Extensions now allow you to
   easily select or install other GDOS drivers and configure and
   install fonts.

FontGDOS product support is provided in GEnie's Atari Roundtable, 
Category 14, Topic __. You may also send e-mail to me (B.REHBOCK) or
Mike Fulton (MIKE-FULTON) if you have technical difficulties. 

Developers that are interested in correctly providing application
printer output should contact Gail Bacani on 408-745-2022 to obtain
the latest GDOS application information. It is available to
registered commercial developers for free. United States and Canadian
residents that are interested in GDOS programming can order the "GEM
Programming Guide" from Atari Developer Relations for only $40.00
(US). The kit contains:

1) GEM Programming Guide,
     Volume 1 -- VDI (Third Edition:  January 1989)
     Volume 2 -- AES (Third Edition:  January 1989)
2) GDOS/FSM GDOS Developer Guide (10/91)
3) GEM Resource Construction Set (undated)

4) TOS Developer's Kit Disk #2:  MicroEMACS / Source Code Examples / RCS

Simply send a check or money order for $40.00 and a note indicating
you would like to receive the "GEM Programming Guide" to:

Atari Corp.
1196 Borregas Ave.
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
Attn: Developer Relations/Material Order

Residents outside U.S. and Canada must contact their local Atari
Subsidiary for the kit.

Enjoy this latest operating system upgrade from Atari.


Bill Rehbock
Director of Applications Software, Atari Corp.







                        A User's Guide to FontGDOS
                   Copyright ˝ 1992 by Atari Corporation



Introduction:
-------------
We should begin with a quick review of what GDOS is and what it allows you
to do.  GDOS is actually an extension of your operating system.  It allows
the programs that you run to output text and graphics to printers and other
devices besides the screen.  GDOS also enables you to print text in many
different font faces.  Instead of typing characters in the standard system
font, you now have access to Swiss, Times, Typewriter, and a multitude of
other fonts.

GDOS is run when you first turn on your machine.  For now, don't worry
about where to put it or what it needs to run.  Our install program will
set your system up so that everything will be placed in the correct
location.


Basic Concepts:
---------------
FontGDOS replaces the original GDOS.  If you already have the original GDOS
installed on your system, then your first question is probably, "What's the
difference between the GDOS that I have now and FontGDOS"?  The main thing
is that FontGDOS uses memory much more efficiently than earlier versions of
GDOS.

For example, with the original GDOS v1.1, if you had 18 fonts installed for
your printer, taking up 1.5 megabytes of disk space, then when your program
tried to load printer fonts, GDOS would load all 18 fonts and use up 1.5
megabytes of your free memory (unless you didn't have that much memory
available).  This would be the case even if the document you were printing
only used 3 or 4 of the 18 total fonts.

One of the main new features in FontGDOS is "font caching".  With font
caching, you tell FontGDOS how much memory that you wish to devote to
storing your bitmap fonts.  This memory is called a cache.  FontGDOS will
wait to load in a font from disk until when it's actually needed, and then
store it in the cache for quick access.  When there is no longer any room
in the cache for the next font, FontGDOS will remove something from the
cache to make room.  As long as the memory that you allocate for the cache
is bigger than the largest font, FontGDOS will be able to use as many
bitmap fonts as you wish in a limited amount of memory.

An even more enhanced version of GDOS known as FSMGDOS is available
separately for an additional charge.  FSMGDOS uses special outline fonts
which can be scaled to any size or rotated at any angle without a loss of
quality (unlike bitmapped fonts).  FSMGDOS also works with bitmapped fonts
like FontGDOS, but FontGDOS does not work with FSMGDOS outline fonts.
Contact your Atari dealer for information on obtaining FSMGDOS.



Getting Started
---------------
Installing FontGDOS onto your system is a simple task.  Insert FontGDOS
disk #1 into your floppy drive.  Run INSTALL.PRG on this disk to install
FontGDOS onto your system.  The install program will walk you through the
steps needed to install FontGDOS.  When the installation is completed, you
will have all of  the necessary files on your system to begin.  (The
install program is the same for both FontGDOS and FSMGDOS.  Make sure you
select FontGDOS for installation unless you have FSMGDOS.)

After the installation is completed, you must reboot your machine to enable
FontGDOS.  If you've installed it correctly, you'll get the new FontGDOS
sign-on message while you boot up.  If all went well, FontGDOS was
installed and you should be seeing a normal desktop.  If FontGDOS gives you
an error message while booting up,  run the install program again, paying
close attention to any installation error messages which may come up.  Note
that the installation program will install brand new device drivers, and
that old drivers for the original GDOS will not work correctly with either
FSMGDOS or FONTGDOS.  (However, Atari supplies drivers for most popular
printers with FontGDOS and FSMGDOS.)

FontGDOS should be compatible with all programs that use the original GDOS.
Try running some of these programs to see how they work with FontGDOS.
Note that the installation program will set up your system so that you can
use all of your newly installed fonts immediately.  To change the setup
(e.g. if you want to use older GDOS fonts from an earlier GDOS
installation), read the section below on how to use the FontGDOS Printer
Selector accessory.

Note: The remainder of the document will refer to accessories only, but in
      all cases the same thing applies to both the Desk Accessory the
      corresponding CPX modules as well.  Refer to the documentation for
      the eXtensible CONTROL Panel (XCONTROL) for more information on
      installing CPX modules.

In addition to the FontGDOS program, three accessories have been provided:

Printer Config:    This accessory is used to change your printer driver
                   configuration;  you can change the print quality, page
                   size, number of colors, etc.

Printer Selector:  This accessory is used to select the type of printer
                   that you are currently using and to control the
                   installation of bitmap fonts and other GEM device
                   drivers.

FSM Font Manager:  This accessory is used to set the size of the FontGDOS
                   memory cache (and for several other purposes when
                   FSMGDOS is installed.).


You should not need to use these accessories very often, since the install
program should set up your system to be ready to use.  For more information
on these accessories, please refer the sections below.


The ASSIGN.SYS & EXTEND.SYS files
---------------------------------
The ASSIGN.SYS file and EXTEND.SYS file contain the information for your
FontGDOS setup.  The ASSIGN.SYS file is used in exactly the same way with
FontGDOS or FSMGDOS as with the original GDOS.  All of the new information
required by FontGDOS or FSMGDOS is controlled by the EXTEND.SYS file.

If you use the accessories to create or modify your FontGDOS setup, they
will manipulate the ASSIGN.SYS and EXTEND.SYS files for you, and you won't
have to worry about doing anything with these files.  Even if you have
experience manipulating the ASSIGN.SYS file for the original GDOS, you will
find using the accessories much easier.


Setting Your Cache Size
-----------------------
As mentioned before, FontGDOS does memory caching of bitmap fonts.  It is a
good idea to make the bitmap cache larger than the file size of the biggest
bitmap font that you have installed.  If the cache is too small for a font,
the font cannot be loaded into the system.  If the cache is too small to
hold any bitmap fonts, then FontGDOS will ignore them altogether.

To set the amount of memory used for the bitmap font cache, go to the
"Options Menu" of the FSM Font Manager accessory and click on the "Outline
Font Setup".  From there, click on "Set Font Cache."  The top two values,
labeled "Character" and "Miscellaneous", are used by FSMGDOS for keeping
track of outline font information.  With FontGDOS, set both of these to
zero.

The last cache is the "Bitmap Font" cache used for bitmap fonts.  To set
the size for this cache, find out which bitmap fonts you use and what their
file sizes are.  To set the very minimal cache size, just set the cache to
slightly bigger than the biggest bitmap font file.  From there, if you want
to improve speed and reduce disk accesses, you can increase the size of the
cache as memory permits.

   Note: The accessory asks you to set the size of the cache in Kbytes.
         One Kbyte is equal to 1024 bytes, or characters, of memory.  If
         your biggest font has a file size of 124,867, then you need a
         minimum cache size of approximately 125 Kbytes to accommodate it.

After setting the desired cache size, select the "OK" button to return to
the OUTLINE FONT SETUP menu.  The Bitmap cache is the only setting in the
FSM Font Manager accessory which is important to FontGDOS, so you don't
need to change anything else.  Select "OK" again.  Now you should be back
at the main menu of the accessory.  Select "Save" to write the changed
cache size back to the EXTEND.SYS file.


FOR EXPERTS ONLY:   The size of the cache used for bitmapped fonts is
                    controlled by the:

                    BITCACHE=??????

                    line in your EXTEND.SYS file.  (Where ?????? means how
                    many bytes of memory you want FontGDOS to use for the
                    cache.)



Using the Printer Selector Accessory
------------------------------------
For best results, step through these instructions while viewing the
accessory on your computer.

The main function of the Printer Selector is to allow you to choose which
printer you wish to use with GDOS.  This is particularly useful when you
physically want to change printers (e.g.  You switch from a dot-matrix
printer for printing labels to a laser printer for word processing.).

You can also select final or draft mode from this accessory.  Selecting
draft mode reduces the quality of output while speeding up printing time
(Note that some printers do not support draft mode.).

In addition, the Printer Selector is an accessory that manipulates the
configuration file called the ASSIGN.SYS.  This file contains the
information on where FontGDOS locates its drivers and bitmap fonts and
which of those GDOS should use.

The installation program should have set up your ASSIGN.SYS file so that
you don't really need to change anything.  The accessory will be most
useful to you when you need to change printers or add new bitmap fonts.
Novice users should limit the changes made with this accessory although
users familiar with the ASSIGN.SYS format will find it easy to configure
their systems.

When you run the accessory, it should come up displaying the current
printer.  If you wish to use a different printer, just click on the printer
name, and select from the list that pops down.  Notice the two buttons
labeled "Quality:"  which allow you to choose final or draft mode.

To make other changes, such as changing other drivers, or the active bitmap
fonts, or the pathname of the directory where the fonts and drivers are
located, click on the "Options" button to enter a box labeled "MAIN MENU"
which contains three buttons.

Clicking on "Set Font/Driver Path" will come up a box showing the current
path where FontGDOS expects to find bitmap fonts, printer drivers, and
other device drivers.  If you want to change this path, clicking on the
pathname shown will bring up the standard file selector and allow you to
select the drive and directory where the fonts and drivers are found.

If you click on "Driver Installation", the top half should display the
active devices (i.e. the drivers that applications can use).  Use the up
and down arrows to look at the different device numbers and their
corresponding drivers.

Note that you cannot delete devices 1 to 10 (they should always use
"SCREEN.SYS" unless you have an add-on video card that uses a different
screen device driver), but you can change the other entries.  Device 21
corresponds to the "Current Printer" of the previous menu.  You can change
the printer driver from either menu, but the current menu allows you to
change other devices as well.  The list below shows the numbers for the
basic device driver installation:

Common Device Driver Numbers
----------------------------
 1 = Default Screen Device                  (Devices 1-10 are normally
 2 = ST Low Resolution                       set to use SCREEN.SYS unless
 3 = ST Medium Resolution                    an add-on video card is used.)
 4 = ST High Resolution
 5 = reserved
 6 = TT Medium Resolution
 7 = reserved
 8 = TT High Resolution
 9 = TT Low Resolution
10 = reserved

21 = Main Printer driver

31 = GEM Metafile driver (META.SYS)

The bottom half of this menu is used to add more devices to the active
list.  Novice users should not worry about this section.  To add devices,
simply use the arrows to move to the device number you wish to add.  The
title above the arrows will change to indicate the type of driver that is
expected (devices 1-10 are for the screen; 11-20 are for plotters; 21-30
are for printers; etc.)  Once you have found the device number you want to
add, then click on the box that says "None".  A pop-up menu will appear and
allow you to select the name of the device from the available drivers.  (If
the device driver you want is not shown, then it is not present in the
font/driver directory recognized by FontGDOS.  You must copy the driver to
this folder before it can be installed.)

To delete a device, use the arrows under "Active Devices" to find the
device, then click the "Delete" button at the bottom of the menu box.

To return to the previous menu, click on the "Menu" button.

If you click on the "Font Installation" button, you can add or delete GEM
bitmap fonts for different devices.

As you step through the different devices (by clicking the arrows), notice
how each device has a set of fonts listed.  These are the available bitmap
fonts an application will see if it uses that device.  (Some devices may
not have any fonts installed.)

Devices 1 through 10 represent the different screen modes.  Device 21 is
the main printer device, the one that your applications are most likely to
use.

If you wish to add fonts for a particular application, add them to the
devices that will be used by that application.  (Typically, this will mean
the screen devices and printer device #21).

To actually add fonts, move to the desired device number, then click on the
drop-down menu called "Active Fonts" and click on "Show Inactive Fonts".
Now click on the fonts that you want (hold the shift key to select multiple
fonts) and click on "Append".

You can return to the list of active fonts by clicking on the drop-down
menu called "Inactive Fonts" and selecting "Show Active Fonts".

To remove fonts from a device, move to the desired device number.  Now
click on the fonts that you want (hold the shift key to select multiple
fonts) and click on "Remove".

Note: To install a font, it must be located in the directory specified
      earlier in the Font/Driver path setting.

      Also, the different screen modes can share the same fonts to a
      certain degree.  Most modes use square pixels.  These modes can use
      the same bitmap fonts.  But ST Medium Resolution and TT Low
      Resolution have rectangular pixels, and cannot use the same fonts as
      the other screen modes (or the same as each other).

When you are done changing the font installation, select "Menu" to return
to the MAIN MENU box.

Return to the top menu of the accessory by clicking on the "TOP MENU"
button.

If you have made changes and want to save them so that they will become
active, select the "Save" button.  An alert will ask if you want to save
the ASSIGN.SYS file.  Select "OK" to save your changes, or "Cancel" if you
change your mind.

To exit the accessory, select the "Exit" button.  If you have made changes
and haven't saved them, then you will see an alert telling you that the
options have changed, and asking if you want to save the ASSIGN.SYS file.
Select "OK" to save your changes, or "Cancel" if you want to exit without
saving them.

Any changes made will be used the next time a device is opened by an
application.  If a device is already in use, then you will not see your
changes happen until the device is closed and reopened.



Using the Printer Config Accessory
----------------------------------
For best results, step through these instructions while viewing the
accessory on your computer.

The Printer Config accessory is used to change settings in the drivers for
items such as the page size, print quality, or number of colors.

Configuring drivers should be done before running an application.  If a
driver is already in use, you will not see the changes happen until the
next time the driver is opened.

If you click on "Select Drivers", a standard file selector will appear
showing you the available device drivers.   (All device drivers will be
shown, not just printer drivers.  Also, drivers will be shown even if they
are not currently active.)  Select the printer whose driver you wish
to change.

You should now see a display of the driver specifications.  If a box is
shadowed, you may change the value by clicking on it.  If the particular
printer driver you have chosen supports a particular feature (e.g.
different page sizes or color palettes), use the pop-up menu to look at the
available selections.  All you need to do is click on the appropriate
selection.

Note that some drivers do not have any configurable features, and that the
accessory will modify the actual driver file on your floppy or hard disk
when a modification is made.  Do not modify your only copy of a driver
file.



Using the FSM Font Manager Accessory
------------------------------------
For FontGDOS, the only portion of the FSM Font Manager Accessory that is
important is the part that lets you set the cache size for bitmap fonts.
See the section above labeled "Setting Your Cache Size" for information on
using this part of the accessory.




                           QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE
                           ---------------------



To Set Cache Sizes:
-------------------

1) Run the FSM Font Manager accessory.

2) Use Options Menu to select "Outline Font Setup" and select "Set Font
   Cache".

3) Set "Character" and "Miscellaneous" to 0 if using FontGDOS.  Set "Bitmap
   Font" to the amount of memory (in Kbytes) that you want to use for the
   cache.  (This should be at least as large as your biggest font.)

4) Select "OK".  Select "OK" again.  Select "Save" to save your changes.
   You must reboot for the new cache size to be used.




To Change Printer Drivers:
--------------------------

1) Run the Printer Selector accessory.

2) Click on pop-up below "Current Printer".  It will currently show the
   active printer.

3) Select the name of the desired new printer driver.

4) Select "Save".  Your new printer driver will be used the next time an
   application opens the printer device.



To Change Bitmap Fonts:
-----------------------

1) Run Printer Selector accessory.

2) Click on "Options" then on "Font Installation".

3) Select the desired device number with up/down arrows.

4) To add fonts, click on "Active Fonts" menu, and choose the "Show
   Inactive Fonts" option.  Click on the desired fonts and use "Append"
   button to activate.

5) To remove fonts,  With "Active Fonts" menu shown, click on the desired
   desired font names and use the "Remove" button to deactivate.  (If the
   "Inactive Fonts" menu is shown, then click on it and choose the "Show
   Active Fonts" option to change the menu.)


